The 2017 Catalan regional election was held on Thursday, 21 December 2017, to elect the 12th Parliament of the Autonomous Community of Catalonia. All 135 seats in the Parliament were up for election. The election was called by Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy after the invocation of Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution of 1978 and his declaring the entire Catalan government removed from office. The three pro-Catalan independence parties won a majority of parliamentary seats, claiming 70 out of 135. They did not secure a majority of the popular vote, receiving 47.49%, although this was sufficient to outpoll the 43.48% received by the three main anti-independence parties.

After the 2015 election, pro-Catalan independence parties held a majority in the Parliament, but incumbent President Artur Mas and his Junts pel Sí (JxSí) alliance—made up primarily by Democratic Convergence of Catalonia (CDC) and Republican Left of Catalonia (ERC)—required support from the Popular Unity Candidacy (CUP) to get to office. However, the CUP's decision to vote against his investiture forced Mas to withdraw his bid for re-election as President at the last minute, in order to prevent a new election, and with mayor of Girona Carles Puigdemont being elected as President of a CDC–ERC coalition instead. Shortly thereafter, CDC was re-founded as the Catalan European Democratic Party (PDeCAT).

On 27 October 2017, the pro-independence majority in the Catalan parliament voted in favour of a unilateral declaration of independence, just hours before the Spanish Senate voted to invoke Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution. After the invocation of Article 155 Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy sacked the Catalan government and dissolved the Parliament, calling a regional election for 21 December. With 37 seats, the Citizens Party emerged as the largest in the parliament. However, due to the combined performance of Junts per Catalunya and Republican Left of Catalonia–Catalonia Yes, parties in support of independence maintained their majority in the election, meaning that the coalition government, spearheaded by the exiled former President Puigdemont, which declared a Catalan Republic following the controversial independence referendum, is poised to return to power, though the loss of seats held by independent members of the dissolved Junts pel Sí bloc means that it has been reduced by two seats.

Overview
Background
Government formation
Main article: 2015–16 Catalan government formation
The 2015 election resulted in pro-Catalan independence Junts pel Sí (JxSí) (a coalition comprising the two main centre-right and centre-left Catalan parties at the time, Democratic Convergence of Catalonia (CDC) and Republican Left of Catalonia (ERC), together with several minor parties) and Popular Unity Candidacy (CUP) holding a slim majority of seats, despite not securing a majority of votes as was their objective. President Artur Mas' JxSí coalition also fell short of its goal to secure an absolute majority on its own, obtaining 62 seats against the combined 63 of the remaining opposition parties. Thus, Mas found himself depending on CUP's support for securing his nomination to be re-elected to the office. The CUP, however, had difficulty in supporting Mas, whom they viewed as personally tainted by several corruption scandals involving his party, CDC. In the end, a last minute deal was struck between JxSí and the CUP to ensure a pro-independence government, narrowly avoiding a new election being called, this deal resulted in Mas being replaced as President by Carles Puigdemont.

2017 events
Further information: Catalan independence referendum, 2017 and 2017 Spanish constitutional crisis
On 26 October 2017, it was expected that President of the Generalitat of Catalonia Carles Puigdemont would call an election to prevent the enforcement of Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution, which was due to be approved by the Spanish Senate on the following day amid the 2017 Spanish constitutional crisis and which would have resulted in direct rule from the central government in Madrid being imposed over Catalonia. This move sparked outcry within pro-independence ranks, including members within Puigdemont's coalition, who had aimed for a unilateral declaration of independence in response to the Spanish government's move to trigger Article 155. Finally, President Puigdemont ruled out calling an election, allegedly because of the Spanish government's refusal to call off the invocation of the Article 155 procedure even were an election to be called by Catalan authorities. After Puigdemont's refusal to call an election, a debate over a possible declaration of independence went ahead as planned in the Parliament of Catalonia later that day and into the next day, simultaneous to the Spanish Senate debating the enforcement of direct rule in Catalonia. At the end of the debate, the Catalan parliament voted a unilateral declaration of independence which was backed 70–10, two MPs casting a blank ballot and all MPs from Citizens, the Socialists' Party of Catalonia and the People's Party boycotting the vote. Mariano Rajoy subsequently removed the entire Catalan government from office and declared the Parliament's dissolution, calling a regional election for 21 December 2017.

Puigdemont and part of his dismissed cabinet fled to Belgium on 30 October in a move to avoid action from the Spanish judiciary, as the Spanish Attorney General José Manuel Maza announced a criminal complaint against them for rebellion, sedition and embezzlement. On 2 November, the Spanish National Court ordered that eight members of the deposed Catalan government—including former Vice President and ERC leader Oriol Junqueras—be remanded in custody without bail after being summoned to appear to respond to the criminal charges pressed against them, with a ninth—Santi Vila—being granted a €50,000 bail. European Arrest Warrants were issued for Puigdemont and his four other cabinet members in Belgium refusing to attend the hearing.

Electoral system
The Parliament of Catalonia is the devolved, unicameral legislature of the autonomous community of Catalonia, having legislative power in regional matters as defined by the Spanish Constitution and the Catalan Statute of Autonomy, as well as the ability to vote confidence in or withdraw it from a President of the Generalitat. Voting for the Parliament is on the basis of universal suffrage, which comprises all nationals over eighteen, registered in Catalonia and not legally barred from voting. Additionally, Catalans abroad are required to apply for voting before being permitted to vote, a system known as "begged" or expat vote (Spanish: Voto rogado).

The 135 members of the Parliament of Catalonia are elected using the D'Hondt method and a closed list proportional representation, with a threshold of 3 percent of valid votes—which includes blank ballots—being applied in each constituency. Parties not reaching the threshold are not taken into consideration for seat distribution. Additionally, the use of the D'Hondt method may result in an effective threshold over three percent, depending on the district magnitude. Seats are allocated to constituencies, corresponding to the provinces of Barcelona, Girona, Lleida and Tarragona. Each constituency is allocated a fixed number of seats: 85 for Barcelona, 17 for Girona, 15 for Lleida and 18 for Tarragona.

The electoral law provides that parties, federations, coalitions and groupings of electors are allowed to present lists of candidates. However, parties, federations or coalitions who have not obtained a mandate in the Parliament at the preceding election are required to secure at least the signature of 0.1 percent of the electors entered in electoral register of the constituency for which they are seeking election, whereas groupings of electors are required to secure the signature of 1 percent of electors. Electors are barred from signing for more than one list of candidates. Concurrently, parties and federations intending to enter in coalition to take part jointly at an election are required to inform the relevant Electoral Commission within ten days of the election being called.

Election date
The term of the Parliament of Catalonia expired four years after the date of its previous election, unless it was dissolved earlier. The President of the Generalitat was required to call an election fifteen days prior to the date of expiry of parliament, with election day taking place within from forty to sixty days after the call. The previous election was held on 27 September 2015, which meant that the legislature's term would have expired on 27 September 2019. The election was required to be called no later than 12 September 2019, with it taking place up to the sixtieth day from the call, setting the latest possible election date for the Parliament on Monday, 11 November 2019.

The President of the Generalitat had the prerogative to dissolve the Parliament of Catalonia and call a snap election, provided that no motion of no confidence was in process and that dissolution did not occur before one year had elapsed since a previous one under this procedure. In the event of an investiture process failing to elect a regional President within a two-month period from the first ballot, the Parliament was to be automatically dissolved and a fresh election called.

Parties and leaders
After independence was declared by the Parliament of Catalonia on 27 October and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy announced the Parliament's dissolution and a regional election for 21 December, pro-independence parties debated whether they should contest the election–thus abiding to Spanish law and acknowledging independence did not take place–or boycott it and risking remaining absent from the Parliament in the next legislature.

On 5 November 2017, the Catalan European Democratic Party (PDeCAT) proposed Carles Puigdemont as their election candidate, who in the previous days had already showed interested in leading the PDeCAT into the 21 December election from Belgium. PDeCAT members sought to contest the election into an unitary list formed by pro-independence parties for the right of self-determination and against the use of Article 155, calling for "amnesty of political prisoners". Republican Left of Catalonia (ERC) rejected to renew the Junts pel Sí alliance and conditioned its participation into any prospective electoral coalition on it including the Popular Unity Candidacy (CUP) and members from Catalunya Sí que es Pot–in reference to the Podemos branch in Catalonia (Podem), led by Albano Dante Fachin, who had increasingly distanced himself from the party's national leadership. The CUP dubbed the election as "illegitimate" and rejected contesting the election under their own brand, but did not rule out running under a different label or supporting a unitary pro-independence alliance. However, after the CUP ruled out a coalition with other parties on 7 November, ERC rejected a joint candidacy of pro-independence parties and announced it would contest the election on its own.

Catalunya en Comú, Ada Colau's party successor to the En Comú Podem electoral alliance which contested the 2015 and 2016 general elections in Catalonia, chose Xavier Domènech as its electoral candidate. Domènech proposed an alliance with Podem, which under Fachin had rejected merging into Colau's party earlier in 2017. Podem's grassroots members voted in favour of an alliance with Catalunya en Comú, after Fachin had resigned as regional party leader over disputes with the national leadership. Both parties announced they would contest the election under the Catalunya en Comú–Podem label.

On 7 November, the Socialists' Party of Catalonia (PSC) announced an agreement with Units per Avançar (English: United to Advance), the wing of the defunct party Democratic Union of Catalonia that rejected separatism in 2015, to integrate some of its members in its list and hopefully add the near 102,000 votes collected by this party at the previous election, which were not enough to gain representation of their own. The agreement has been denied to be a proper coalition; as such, PSC will run under its own name only.

On 13 November, the PDeCAT announced that it would run under the Junts per Catalunya platform, with Carles Puigdemont at the head of it.

Opinion polls
The table below lists voting intention estimates in reverse chronological order, showing the most recent first and using the dates when the survey fieldwork was done, as opposed to the date of publication. Where the fieldwork dates are unknown, the date of publication is given instead. The highest percentage figure in each polling survey is displayed with its background shaded in the leading party's colour. If a tie ensues, this is applied to the figures with the highest percentages. The "Lead" column on the right shows the percentage-point difference between the parties with the highest percentages in a given poll. When available, seat projections are also displayed below the voting estimates in a smaller font. 68 seats are required for an absolute majority in the Parliament of Catalonia.

Aftermath
The results were announced after polls in the region closed, with the Citizens–Party of the Citizenry becoming the largest party in the regional parliament, but pro-independence parties maintained a majority of seats.

Citizens–Party of the Citizenry gained twelve seats in the election under the leadership of Inés Arrimadas, bringing their total to 37. This was viewed as highly significant, as it meant that the largest party in the region was overtly and directly opposed to independence. However, even this increased tally left them a significant amount, some 31 seats, short of a majority in the parliament.

Carles Puigdemont, president of the self-declared Catalan Republic, and his party, Junts per Catalunya, also saw an increase in their seat total, emerging as the second largest party in the region with 34 seats. This represented an increase of 3 seats for the party, which stood on a staunchly pro-independence platform, as dictated by its exiled leader. While the party lost its position as the largest in parliament, the improved performance of the Republican Left of Catalonia–Catalonia Yes, a left-wing party also campaigning for independence from Spain, helped ensure that they would maintain their dominant role in regional politics. The party, under the stewardship of Oriol Junqueras, who served as Vice President of Catalonia under Puigdemont, secured 32 seats, leaving the pro-independence parties a mere two seats short of re-establishing a coalition and holding their majority. These seats were provided by the Popular Unity Candidacy–Constituent Call, who, in spite of severely diminished performance from the last election, still captured four seats courtesy of strong performance in Barcelona. This ensured that pro-independence parties were able to maintain their majority in the parliament, and thereby their grasp of power over the region. Five independent politicians, who were participants in the Junts pel Sí bloc but not party members, lost their seats. Consequentially, despite both parties increasing their number of seats, the majority was diminished by 2 seats, but nonetheless maintained. The result was hailed by Puigdemont as a "slap in the face" for Madrid and for Mariano Rajoy.